Assessing the Effects of Different Harvesting Practices on the Forestry Sector’s Climate Benefits Potential: A Stand Level Theoretical Study in an Eastern Canadian Boreal Forest

Abstract

The contribution of the forest sector to climate change mitigation needs to rely on optimal strategies that include forest management, wood supply, wood product disposal, and replacement of GHG-intensive materials and energy sources. Our study aimed to assess the impact of alternative forest management practices applied at the stand scale on the capacity of the forest sector to reduce its radiative forcing, using the boreal forests of eastern Canada as a case study. We simulated management of a balsam fir–white birch stand over a sixty-year period and determined the sectorial carbon and radiative forcing budget for a reference scenario (no harvest) and for nineteen clearcut and partial cut alternatives. The results suggest that logging may not significantly reduce carbon emissions compared to a preservation practice and does not yield any climate benefits in terms of radiative forcing. In a context for which the substitution effect of wood products on markets is expected to be limited, the mitigation potential of a scenario is mostly driven by the capacity of the forest ecosystem carbon sink to compensate for the substantial CO2 and CH4 emissions from wood product decay in landfills. The improved assessment of carbon emission temporality, incorporation of ecosystem carbon dynamics, and improved consideration of substitution and the decay of wood products are essential in the development of any forest management strategy. Neglecting these elements can lead to misconceptions and prevent informed mitigation decisions.

Keywords: biogenic carbon; forest sector; forest management; radiative forcing; mitigation potential; wood products; harvest type; partial cut

1. Introduction

Forestry-based climate change mitigation has become a crucial aspect of the Paris Agreement, potentially accounting for up to a quarter of the total planned reductions in emissions [1]. To effectively reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and achieve the climate change mitigation targets outlined in international agreements, efforts must be made to enhance natural carbon sinks and reduce emissions. This can be achieved in the forest sector by increasing carbon sequestration in forest ecosystems, reducing emissions from the decay of wood-based products at their end-of-life and expanding the use of wood-based products to replace materials and energy sources that rely heavily on fossil fuels and emit high levels of GHGs [2,3].

In the boreal biome, managed forests cover large territories, and communities are built around well-established wood processing industries. The relationship between forest ecosystems and industrial networks enables the use of wood products to fulfill material and energy demand for domestic and international markets, thereby offering potential for mitigating climate change [4]. Therefore, various initiatives have been launched by both scientists and professionals to develop forest management and wood production practices that can contribute to climate change mitigation.

The literature for the boreal forests of eastern Canada suggests that a reduction in the volume of harvested wood from forest ecosystems at a landscape or regional scale may be an effective approach for climate change mitigation [5,6]. The carbon dynamics at the landscape level may vary from those at the stand level due to the impact of different factors, especially the age class distribution of different stands and divergent tree growth rates [7]. Assessing carbon dynamics at the stand level is crucial as it enhances the understanding of expected large-scale trends. However, given the scarcity of field-scale carbon studies for alternative forest management practices in the boreal forests of eastern Canada, the simulation of these practices and their impact on the carbon budget and radiative forcing of the forest sector needs to be conducted.

Clearcutting of boreal forests have been shown to result in a period of net emissions to the atmosphere following harvest, as the annual emissions from organic matter decomposition are greater than the annual carbon sequestration from photosynthesis for at least 10 years [8,9,10]. Conversely, continuous-cover forestry based on partial cuts is associated with reduced fluctuations in the net ecosystem production by preserving stocks of dead organic matter (DOM) [6,11] and promoting the growth of residual trees [12,13,14].

Continuous-cover forestry may enable a continuous accumulation of carbon in the ecosystem while still maintaining a level of wood production and substitution of products in the market [15]. Employing partial cutting could enhance forest carbon sequestration and preserve greater soil carbon stocks compared to clearcutting. Such forest carbon benefits have been observed across various biomes, including boreal, subtropical, and tropical regions [11].

Ecosystem dynamics after a partial cut are subject to uncertainties that must be considered in any stand-level carbon simulation. The first challenge is the lack of field data on carbon dynamics after partial cutting in the boreal biome. A second important consideration is strongly tied to the survival of residual trees, as increased losses through mortality could impact the next timber production [16] and generate emissions from wood decomposition. In the absence of fire or insect outbreaks, a high proportion of this mortality can be due to windthrow [16], which may vary along the stand vulnerability to it [17,18].

The goal of forest management to produce wood products for markets should not overlook the potentially high emissions from the decay of wood products at the end of their service life. Although the climate benefit of long-lived wood products (sawnwood) on GHG emissions can be substantial [5,19], a portion of the biogenic carbon from all wood products may still be released into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4), in proportions depending on the end-of-life conditions [20]. The global warming potential (GWP100) of CH4 over a 100-year horizon is 25 [21]. Wood products with a high rate of decay in landfills and a high rate of methane emissions, such as pulp and paper [20], may have a detrimental impact on the carbon budget of the forest sector. Additionally, these products tend to have limited substitution effects, which is a crucial element for achieving climate mitigation targets [22,23,24], despite uncertainties surrounding the real substitution impact [25,26]. It is therefore important to consider the type of harvest that may result in the production of different assortments of wood products.

When evaluating an alternative carbon management strategy, it is necessary to consider actions relative to a reference scenario. To calculate the potential carbon mitigation benefit of a given alternative practice, only the difference in GHG emissions between the alternative scenario and the reference scenario should be taken into account [5,27].

To maintain temporal consistency in the assessment of mitigation potential, it is essential to consider the radiative forcing effects of biogenic carbon-based strategies [28,29]. As the balance between emissions and removals over a specified time period does not necessarily have a neutral effect on the climate, combining static and dynamic radiative forcing assessments can provide a more accurate representation of the impact of alternative biogenic carbon management strategies [30].

Our study sought to assess and compare the effects of different harvesting practices on the climate change mitigation potential of the forest sector. This assessment was based on the carbon balance and associated radiative forcing of carbon emissions and removals from forest ecosystems, wood product decay, and product substitution on markets. The analysis was performed at the stand level for stands typical of the boreal balsam fir–white birch landscapes of eastern Canada, an economically significant area for the North American forest industry.
