Changing Winters and Adaptive Water Governance: A Case Study on the Kemi River Basin, Finland

Abstract

This paper studies adaptive water governance in the context of hydropower and flood-risk management. The Kemi River basin acts as an empirical setting to study the environmental change and the capacity of the management system to respond to it. Hydropower and reservoir development has been a source of a decade-long environmental conflict in the river basin. This study aims to find out how governance structures are adapting to the environmental change brought on by climate change. The study is based on case study research, and it combines long-term monitoring data, semi-structured interviews conducted in December 2020 and January 2021, and Finnish administrative court rulings. The results reveal that the water governance in the Kemi River basin is based on a technology driven aquatic regime, which has been a source of persistent environmental conflict between technology and nature. The flood-risk management is based on adaptive planning cycles and is implemented in a participatory manner, although it is strengthening the conflict in the area, as some stakeholders suggests reservoirs as a solution, which neglects the potential of integrative river basin management.

Keywords: adaptive water governance; socio-ecological systems; flood-risk management

1. Introduction

Climate change causes extreme weather events across the globe, and the Arctic and Sub-Arctic regions have experienced rapid temperature rise. An approximately two-times higher rise than the global average is expected in the European North [1,2,3]. The socio-ecological system in the Arctic and Sub-Arctic, its habitats, ecosystems, local communities, and culture need to adapt to the changing conditions caused by climate change [4,5,6]. The effects of climate change are felt at several hydrological, geographical, and institutional scales, and these effects cause uncertainty in the management of aquatic ecosystems [7,8]. In addition to climate change, hydropower and river regulation cause transformations of aquatic regimes locally and globally [8,9]. Therefore, it is relevant to study environmental change and its management in aquatic ecosystems.

Adaptive water governance has been promoted through the EU water policy because of its potential to assist transition to sustainability and facilitate learning [10,11]. In 2007, the European Commission introduced the Floods Directive, FD (Directive 2007/60/EC), on the assessment and management of flood risks. The directive aims to establish a common framework to manage flood risks and droughts and reduce flood hazards in Europe [12,13]. It requires member states to prepare flood-risk management plans, which include measures to prevent floods, prepare for possible damage, and conduct flood-risk assessment. The assessment should include mapping of flood extent and assessment of human risk at all water courses and coast lines. Member states should also take adequate and coordinated measures to reduce flood risk, and to reinforce public access to information and participation in the planning process [14]. Similar to the Water Framework Directive (WFD), the FD takes a cyclical approach of updating the management plans every six years, which promotes continuous learning and ecosystem-based management (EBM) [15]. The cyclical approach to river basin management is well suited to adaptively responding to climate change, which is expected to lead to major changes in water flow, risk of flooding and erosion, water quality, aquatic ecosystem, and species distribution.

This paper refers to the concept of adaptive water governance as a process that aims at achieving a balance between the human benefits and ecosystem pressures in aquatic ecosystems and encourages learning and experimentation to increase the resilience of the socio-ecological system [16,17,18]. Adaptive governance has been defined as a process that contains interactions between actors, networks, and institutions that aim at increased capacity of complex socio-ecologic systems to respond to changing circumstances, such as environmental change caused by climate change [18,19,20,21]. This approach takes scale and socio-ecological complexity into account and motivates experimentation, learning, and capacity building to reduce uncertainty. Less attention has been paid on the cultural dimension of adaptive capacity, which recognizes the historical and geographical aspects that set the precondition for the responses from the socio-ecological system [22]. This study aims to fill this gap by providing an analysis of changing winters in the Kemi River basin that compares long-term ecological data on ice thickness to qualitative interview data.

Hydropower in the Kemi River basin has been of interest to many studies from sociological and historical disciplines, although none have focused on climate change adaptation from the perspective of changing ice cover. To the best of my knowledge, no previous studies exist in this river basin that combine long-term ecological data to qualitative empirical data. Järvikoski [23] found that local inhabitants had limited opportunities to express their opinion when the Lokka and Porttipahka reservoirs were built because of uneven power structures. Suopajärvi [24] revealed how the conflict over building the Vuotos and Ounas reservoirs was framed as a necessity because of economic and modern prosperity and as a threat to nature values and local communities. A study by Mustonen et al. [25] shows how building of those reservoirs led to cultural erosion of the indigenous Sámi groups. Autti [26] found that damming the Kemi River caused cultural trauma in the local communities, which required several adaptation strategies. Alaniska (2013) [27] found that building of hydropower, which led to the extinction of migratory fish in Kemi River, was a high political priority during the reconstruction period after WWII, which is why regional development and electricity production were supported by the alliance of industry and politicians. Räsänen [28] studied the flood-risk management in Kemi River basin through adaptive cycles approach.

The Kemi River basin acts as an empirical setting to study the environmental change and the capacity of the management system to respond to it, as the hydropower and reservoir development has been source of decade long environmental conflict. In this paper, I will present a case study on the Kemi River basin, focusing on environmental change, flood-risk management and hydropower. This paper examines the adaptive water governance system in the Kemi River basin, and its ways to respond to the change caused by climate change. The main research question is “how are governance structures adapting to the environmental change brought on by climate change?”
