Trend Analysis of Different Climate Parameters and Watering Requirements for Hazelnut in Central Italy Related to Climate Change

Abstract

In this study, the effects of climate change on the irrigation water requirement of hazelnut trees were investigated in Central Italy. The meteorological variables considered were precipitation, temperature, chilling units, and the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) in Central Italy. The hydrological variables were the reference evapotranspiration (ET0) and the water requirement based on soil water balance. Climate data were collected from eight meteorological stations for the period 1974–2021, and ET0 was estimated by the Hargreaves and Samani equation. The SPI index was calculated for a four-month time scale corresponding to the hazelnut growing season (April–August). A statistical analysis of the trends of the variables considered was conducted. The results showed an increasing trend for temperature, ET0, and water requirements, while a decreasing trend was shown for the chilling units. No significant trends were detected for precipitation and SPI.

Keywords: irrigation; silty soil; loam soil; water balance

1. Introduction

Agriculture is one of the sectors that is most damaged by changes in the climate. Precipitation and temperature patterns, their distribution throughout the year, and the incidence of extreme weather events are the most critical variables in the agricultural sector in terms of both production and sustainability [1,2].

In the Mediterranean region, the majority of the 21st Century scenarios show a decrease in average precipitation, with a peak signal in the summer months with increasing intensity and frequency of Extreme Weather Events (EWEs). However, there is no consensus on the evolution of the frequency and intensity of EWEs, even though an increase in precipitation variability during the dry warm season is expected, and an increased probability of occurrence of events conducive to floods has been suggested [3]. According to Valdes-Abellan [4], during the last 50 years, Italy recorded an annual precipitation reduction of about 135 mm.

Cramer et al. [5] indicated that for every 1 °C of global warming, the mean precipitation will probably have decreased by about 4% in many of the regions, particularly in the South Mediterranean areas. In addition, the upward temperature trends have led to a decrease in chilling conditions, affecting the physiological functions of many crops [1,6,7,8]. In general, the synergistic effects of drought, excessive heat load, and high daily irradiance have become limiting factors for agricultural productivity worldwide, with consequences on growth, productivity, and fruit quality [2,7,9]. The European hazelnut (Corylus avellana L.) is a perennial crop adapted to specific locations with humid and temperate conditions in relation to its regular water demand [6,8]. The main hazelnut-producing countries are Turkey, Italy, the United States of America, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Spain, and China [10,11]. Its total cultivated area in the world is about 660,000 ha, with an average world annual production of about 865,000 t (in-shell hazelnuts), showing an increasing trend of geographical expansion caused by strong demand from the confectionery industry [12]. Despite this wide range of natural distribution, commercial orchards are concentrated in a few regions worldwide. In fact, this crop grows more efficiently in areas with an average annual total precipitation of 755–800 mm and with average annual temperatures of 13–16 °C [6,13]. In particular, the water requirement of the European hazelnut ranges between 80 and 100 mm/month from April to August, and the species is quite adaptive to different soil conditions, avoiding clay types due to the risk of root asphyxia [13].

In Italy, the main production zones are Piedmont, Latium, and Campania, however, new growing areas are in Umbria, Abruzzo, in central Italy, in Basilicata in the south, and in Veneto and Lombardy in the north [14], where the hazelnut orchards are normally irrigated using drip irrigation and sub-irrigation systems [13].

The extension of hazelnut growing areas from traditional hilly cultivation to lowlands and the impact of climate change on the year-to-year yield variability are increasingly leading scientists to deepen their understanding of the influence of agro-environmental conditions on key plant processes [15].

In fact, the seasonal cycle of hazelnuts shows the overlapping of different vegetative and reproductive processes (shoot growth, fruit set, shell expansion, kernel filling, flower bud initiation, and differentiation) from the beginning of June to the end of August. These overlapping processes make the availability of water a priority to overcome physiological competition between different organs, especially in relation to the cultivar and the growing environment. During the fertilization/ripening period of hazelnut (from May to August/September), wind, high summer temperatures, and drought adversely affect the annual shoot development, flower bud formation, and internal development of fruits [10]. Consequently, even slight water stress during the sensitive period can markedly reduce the final yield [15]. For this reason, irrigation systems targeting water stress prevention, and allowing reserve accumulation for the following growing seasons, are increasingly adopted in many growing areas such as Nebraska, Spain, and Italy [15,16].

Secondly, for hazelnuts, the dates of flowering and leafing at the end of the winter or early spring are a function of the chilling requirements for the buds and the heat requirements during the post-rest phase [8]. A recent study carried out in the Abruzzo Region, in the central-eastern part of Italy, showed that the chilling units for hazelnuts were highly accumulated, except for the stations located on the southern coast of the region, where the minimum threshold was still reached, although with a decreasing trend [8]. Considering that Rodríguez et al. [7] have pointed out how the viability of temperate fruit-tree varieties in Spain under climate change has been varied, mainly due to a decrease in chilling accumulation, it is necessary to evaluate the chilling units, specifically for hazelnut crops in Central Italy as the first effect of climate change.

Moreover, due to global warming, the assessment of drought risk, even in hazelnut cultivation areas, is crucial information for decision-makers intending to mitigate drought-related crop losses by using a meteorological index known as the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI), which depends on the cumulative amounts of precipitation and ET0 in a given multi-month period [17,18]. Until now, several studies have been carried out on the effects of high temperatures and decreasing chilling conditions on hazelnut physiology [16,19,20], phenology, and yield [8,15,20], but none have evaluated the possible variations of hazelnut watering requirements related to climate change. Recently, studies have been carried out for other crop species, such as olive in Portugal [21] and apple in Turkey and Polland [22]. Some years ago, two authors [23] analyzed the time series of some climatic and agro-climatic indices in the Region of Umbria (Central Italy) for 38 stations. They showed a decreasing trend in the cumulated precipitation characterized by a defined spatial pattern. The precipitation reduction during the irrigation season, although less widespread, could have the most important practical consequences. However, until now, all the studies on hazelnuts were mainly focused on how to mitigate climate change in terms of abiotic stresses using several tools or techniques, such as kaolin [9,16,19,24,25], but not on also how to optimize irrigation in hazelnut orchards to face climate change.
