Adapting to the Impacts Posed by Climate Change: Applying the Climate Change Risk Indicator (CCRI) Framework in a Multi-Modal Transport System

Abstract

Climate change has threatened the infrastructure, operation, policymaking, and other pivotal aspects of transport systems with the accelerating pace of extreme weather events. While a considerable amount of research and best practices have been conducted for transport adaptation to climate change impacts, there is still a wide gap in the systematic assessment of climate risks on all-round transport modes (i.e., road, rail, sea, and air) with a comprehensive review and a quantitative scientific framework. This study aimed to critically review studies on how the transport sector has adapted to the impacts posed by climate change since the dawn of the 21st century. To support climate risk assessment in comprehensive transport systems, we developed a Climate Change Risk Indicator (CCRI) framework and applied it to the case of the British transport network. Focusing on a multi-modal transport system, this offers researchers and practitioners an invaluable overview of climate adaptation research with the latest tendency and empirical insights. Meanwhile, the developed CCRI framework elaborates a referable tool that enables decision-makers to employ objective data to realise quantitative risk analysis for rational transport adaptation planning.

Keywords: climate adaptation; transport infrastructure; risk assessment; multi-modal transport system

1. Introduction

Transport is a crucial component for humans and society [1]. However, many factors, including the economy and public health, affect the system by presenting different disruptions. Furthermore, climate change is one of the most threatening issues influencing human activities because it could significantly reduce the efficiency of transport systems [2]. The goals of Agenda 2030, also known as the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), include a range of objectives related to climate change adaptation [3]. SDG 11, “Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable”, is particularly relevant to climate change adaptation for transport infrastructure. This SDG includes the target to “strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage”, which can be achieved through measures such as improving the resilience of transport infrastructure to climate change impacts. Furthermore, SDG 13, which aims to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts”, is relevant to climate change adaptation for transport infrastructure, as discussed earlier. This SDG aims to “integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies, and planning”, which can help mainstream climate change adaptation considerations in terms of transport infrastructure planning and design.

Therefore, many scholars, such as Becker [4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11] and Schweikert [12,13,14,15], have tended to investigate the relationships between transport and climate change. The focus has been two-fold: mitigation in domination and adaptation with a growing profile. In terms of mitigation, new energy alternatives, such as electric vehicles [16,17] and ships [18,19], and tactical management, such as speed control [20] and reverse logistics [21], have been used to promote decarbonisation with diverse supports, including the application of urban policies [22] and the circular economy concept [23].

In the post-pandemic era, the stresses between transport and climate change are tightening due to complex natural and human factors which increase the vulnerabilities of the urban system [24]. As far as adaptation is concerned, the analysis of climate threats and risks is the first and foremost step. Different transport modes face various climate threats to different extents [25]. A threat could affect several areas and cause damage and transport disruptions with enormous economic losses. For instance, a significant drop in water level occurred in the Port of Montreal, QC, Canada, and impacted its transport networks, including requiring a reduced tonnage per trip, resulting in an increased number of trips and traffic backup [26]. A further decrease in the water level by 0.5–1.0 m was expected to result in an economic loss of over USD1.9 billion by 2050. In the USA, research showed that the temperature increased by 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit annually from the year 2014 to 2015 [27]. Drivers, pedestrians, and bikers who are more likely to go out in warmer weather accounted for over 20% of the increase in road deaths in 2015 [28].

In the UK, there was a 70% increase in flooding events from 1998 to 2009 [29], and a significantly wetter period occurred, prolonging the flooding caused by intensive rainfall from 2013 to 2016. A catastrophic flood that occurred in Cumbria in 2015 broke the precipitation records from 2009 with 341.4 mm of rainfall [30]. Roads were shut in the severely affected areas, and over 100 bridges were damaged or destroyed. In October 2017, the floods between Carlisle and Maryport resulted in enormous disruptions and the blockage of rail lines, estimated to have caused over US$1.3 billion in damages, and claimed 18 lives [31]. In addition, the temperature at London Heathrow Airport in the summer of 2020 reached 37.8 °C, which was recorded as the UK’s third hottest day in history. The Meteorological Office UK confirmed that the August 2020 heatwave broke temperature and duration records. One of the most common impacts is the melting of roads which puts heavy pressure on maintenance [32]. Based on the prediction by the UK Hadley Centre for Climate Change Prediction Research that there would be a 4 °C rise in the global temperature by the end of this century, it was expected that temperature-related accidents would cause approximately 600 additional deaths annually, equating to a cost of US$60 billion from 2010 to 2099 [33]. In 2021, wildfires at White Rock Lake disrupted Kelowna International Airport in BC, Canada, where more than 40 flights were cancelled over 24 h [34].

There is no scarcity of research on climate adaptation in the transport sector (e.g., [31,35,36,37,38]). Nonetheless, the effect of climate change on transport is multi-dimensional, given the popularity of multi-modal transport in the containerised freight sector. A container shipment often combines sea, road, rail, and possibly air transport segments in an established supply chain for door-to-door service from the manufacturer to the end user. The current studies on transport’s adaptation to climate change are lacking integration between different transport modes. Therefore, there is an urgent need to provide an overview of the development of a new holistic climate adaptation framework across different transport modes.

Hence, it is crucial to understand and define the latest developments of related academic studies, which can provide a comparative analysis of the development of different transport modes in the climate adaptation context for cross-sector fertilisation. Understanding such, this study critically reviewed the research on how the transport sector has adapted to the impacts posed by climate change since the dawn of the 21st century. Based on this analysis, we developed a Climate Change Risk Indicator (CCRI) framework to facilitate climate adaptation in a comprehensive transport network. This provides a platform to first compare the climate resilience and vulnerability of different transport modes and realise multi-modal adaptation planning.
