Sex, Nutrition, and NAFLD: Relevance of Environmental Pollution

Abstract

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common form of chronic liver disease and represents an increasing public health issue given the limited treatment options and its association with several other metabolic and inflammatory disorders. The epidemic, still growing prevalence of NAFLD worldwide cannot be merely explained by changes in diet and lifestyle that occurred in the last few decades, nor from their association with genetic and epigenetic risk factors. It is conceivable that environmental pollutants, which act as endocrine and metabolic disruptors, may contribute to the spreading of this pathology due to their ability to enter the food chain and be ingested through contaminated food and water. Given the strict interplay between nutrients and the regulation of hepatic metabolism and reproductive functions in females, pollutant-induced metabolic dysfunctions may be of particular relevance for the female liver, dampening sex differences in NAFLD prevalence. Dietary intake of environmental pollutants can be particularly detrimental during gestation, when endocrine-disrupting chemicals may interfere with the programming of liver metabolism, accounting for the developmental origin of NAFLD in offspring. This review summarizes cause–effect evidence between environmental pollutants and increased incidence of NAFLD and emphasizes the need for further studies in this field.

Keywords: nutrition; contaminated food; environmental pollution; endocrine disrupting chemicals; climate change; liver; NAFLD; sex and gender differences; fertility; pregnancy

1. Introduction

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common form of chronic liver disease with a 30% prevalence in the general population [1] and represents an increasing public health issue being an independent risk factor for several comorbidities, such as type 2 diabetes (T2D), hypertension, dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis, and cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) among others [2,3,4]. In NAFLD patients, enhanced lipid uptake and de novo lipogenesis (DNL), insufficient fatty acid oxidation (FAO), and reduced lipid secretion lead to excessive accumulation of triglycerides (TG) within hepatocytes [5]. The increased lipid content together with the impaired FAO promotes the generation of reactive oxidative species (ROS) and lipotoxic lipid intermediates within the hepatocytes, fostering oxidative stress and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress [6,7,8]. Chronic oxidative stress, in turn, triggers a pro-inflammatory response, mainly mediated by JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) and NF-κB (nuclear factor-κB) signaling pathways, that results in the increased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-6, interleukin 6; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor α) by hepatocytes and non-parenchymal cells [7,9,10,11]. The sustained activation of the pro-inflammatory response bolsters a chronic inflammatory state that triggers the recruitment of other immune cells and activates apoptosis and other cell death mechanisms, boosting the progression of NAFLD toward non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), fibrosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [9,10,11].

Despite the growing public health impact of NAFLD, treatment options remain limited, likely a consequence of the poor understanding of the biological drivers responsible for NAFLD pathogenesis and progression [5,12,13].

2. Nutrition, Sex Differences, and NAFLD

In addition to genetic and epigenetic factors [14,15], obesity, dietary habits, lifestyle, and gut microbiota dysbiosis have a major role in NAFLD incidence, development, and progression [5,16,17,18,19,20]. In particular, overnutrition and poor dietary habits trigger insulin resistance (IR) and increase adiposity, favoring lipid deposition in the liver [5,21]. Beyond positive energy intake, consumption of specific nutrients such as saturated and trans fatty acids or fructose can be particularly detrimental to liver health, facilitating NAFLD [16,17,22]. Overnutrition and unbalanced diets may induce gut dysbiosis and increase gut permeability, alter the gut–liver axis, and expose the liver to microbiota-derived harmful substances, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), ROS, pro-inflammatory cytokines, thereby increasing susceptibility to NAFLD [20].

Compared to men, women show a lower susceptibility to NAFLD, at least until menopause, after which NAFLD prevalence becomes similar for the two sexes [23,24], pointing to the protective effect of estrogens. Accordingly, the incidence of NAFLD is greater in women with reproductive dysfunctions characterized by altered estrogen levels (i.e., polycystic ovary syndrome, PCOS) with respect to fertile women [23,24]. Notably, circulating levels of 17β-estradiol are lower in pre-menopausal, post-menopausal, and PCOS women with NAFLD compared to their control counterparts, while estrogen-based hormone replacement therapy (HRT) reduces the risk of developing NAFLD in post-menopausal women [23,24]. In the liver of fertile female mice, estrogens act mainly through ERα (estrogen receptor alpha), which activity changes according to circulating estrogens, thus modulating the hepatic metabolism to the energy requirements characterizing each reproductive stage [25,26]. In the absence of such an oscillatory activation (e.g., after ovariectomy, OVX), liver metabolic homeostasis is altered, leading to hepatic lipid deposition and inflammation [25,27], a condition resembling the increased incidence of NAFLD observed in post-menopausal women [23,24].

By virtue of its role in the female liver, hepatic estrogen signaling strongly contributes to sex differences in the regulation of hepatic metabolism [28] and in the sex-specific susceptibility to NAFLD [23,24,29]. Hepatic ERα signaling confers to females but not to males the ability to adapt a metabolic response to the excess of dietary lipids, thus limiting liver lipid deposition in a diet-induced mouse model of NAFLD [29]. Notably, such a female-specific and ERα-dependent feature is associated with the ability to preserve the hepatic homeostasis of amino acids (AA), especially of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) [29], in agreement with studies reporting an impaired BCAA metabolism [30,31] and sex-dimorphic changes in BCAA levels in patients with NAFLD/NASH [32]. Accordingly, BCAA shows the potential to alleviate hepatic steatosis and liver injury in a NASH mouse model [33]. Notably, a dietary formula enriched in essential AA and, especially, in BCAA has been shown to rescue the hepatic transcriptomic profile and limit liver lipid deposition in a mouse model of menopause, an effect that strongly relies on hepatic ERα [27].

This ERα-dependent, female-specific ability to modulate hepatic metabolism according to dietary AA may depend on the strict interplay between metabolism and reproduction gained during evolution by the female liver [18]. In addition to estrogens, indeed, dietary AA activates ERα in the liver of females to promote the progression of the reproductive cycle [17]. By virtue of this mechanism and of the sex-dimorphic expression of hepatic ERα, the regulation of hepatic AA metabolism is significantly different in the liver of the two sexes, and it is strongly affected by the nutritional status [28,29]. Under short-term fasting, liver ERα promotes in females, but not in males, the catabolism of the hepatic AA to preserve lipid synthesis, ensuring the progression of the reproductive cycle [28].

In this view, hepatic ERα may act as a sensor of hormonal and nutritional status and differently accounts for the regulation of hepatic metabolism in the two sexes, thus contributing to sex differences in NAFLD susceptibility [34,35]. Furthermore, ERα might have a role in counteracting NAFLD progression to NASH, as suggested by studies reporting a low expression of ERα in the liver of NASH compared to NAFLD patients [36].
