Adapting to Changing Climate: Understanding Coastal Rural Residents’ Relocation Intention in Response to Sea Level Rise

Abstract

Ex situ adaptation in the form of relocation has become inevitable in some low-lying coastal zones where other adaptation strategies become impractical or uneconomical. Although relocation of coastal low-lying communities is anticipated globally, little is still known about the factors that influence household-level adoption. This study draws on an extended version of Protection Motivation Theory (PMT) to assess the factors influencing the relocation intention of three highly vulnerable coastal rural communities in Ghana. A total of 359 household heads were randomly selected for a questionnaire survey. The study employed binary logistic regression to identify key factors that influence residents’ readiness to relocate. The results indicated that cognitive and compositional factors were more important than contextual factors in explaining the intention to relocate among coastal rural communities in Ghana. However, contextual factors mediated or attenuated the influence of cognitive and compositional factors on relocation intention. Based on the findings, this study advocates for intensive education on the effects of future sea-level rise impacts on communities as well as structural and non-structural measures to improve the socio-economic capacity of rural communities.

Keywords: Ghana; sea level rise; coastal rural community; climate change adaptation; relocation; perceived risk

1. Introduction

Coping with sea-level rise as a result of climate change is one of the biggest societal challenges of this century as global mean sea-level rise resulting from thermal expansion (due to the warming of the oceans), loss of ice by glaciers, and ice sheets is accelerating. Studies have shown a higher possibility of sea level rise in the 21st century if the Antarctic and Antarctica ice sheets sections were to collapse [1,2,3]. Analysis of satellite altimetry data from 1993 to 2015 reveals that sea surface height increased nearly three times more than in previous years [4,5]. The fifth assessment report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicted that the average global sea level will likely rise to between 28–68 cm and 52–98 cm by 2100 (RCP 2.6 and 8.5 respectively) based on process-based model projections [6,7]. Changes in sea-level rise have already impacted coastal communities by increasing the risk of flooding and/or erosion of coastal ecosystems and infrastructure [8,9,10]. For instance, in some low-lying coastal areas, especially in the eastern part of Ghana, the coastline is eroding by 20 m or more per year, resulting in loss of settlements and livelihood assets.

Sea-level rise adaptation strategies require regulations, plans, and measures that reduce risks and build resilience. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in their fifth assessment report (AR5), posited a tripartite framework of retreat (moving away from the coast), protect (structural and soft measures), and accommodate (changes in human activities and infrastructure). Among the three basic categories of sea-level rise risk reduction approaches (protection, accommodation, and retreat) reviewed in the literature, managed retreat will be the only long-term adaptation approach in many flood-prone areas [11]. Managed retreat means rethinking coastal life and accepting that certain coastal infrastructures, neighborhoods, or even cities will have to be completely relocated [12]. This adaptation response can be carried out at different scales and with varying degrees of complexity. It may involve the relocation of a few vulnerable homes, a community, or a large city. It can be even more complicated when it involves relocating inhabitants of an island to a new country.

An important issue with relocation is the cooperation of the affected population, which is sometimes difficult. Relocation of low-lying areas is anticipated worldwide, especially in areas where sea-level rise causes flooding and coastal erosion, reduces arable land, depletes groundwater supplies, destroys infrastructure, and endangers human lives and well-being [13,14]. Some countries such as Fiji, Mozambique, and the Solomon Islands have developed and included planned relocation strategies as part of National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs) in their various countries [15,16]. Over the years, the Ghanaian government has used gabions and boulders to protect some major cities and towns from sea-level rise. However, in the most vulnerable coastal rural areas, relocation of entire communities is often proposed, but residents are usually unwilling to relocate due to various reasons reported by [17]. Relocation costs are also underestimated because social and cultural values are not always completely considered. Despite the government’s prioritization of adaptation strategies, the understanding of individual-level adaptation, especially in coastal rural areas, has been inadequate. Climate change adaptation strategies will be ineffective unless they are implemented in the context of household perceptions of climate change risk and self-efficacy in hazard reduction [18]. Although several studies have highlighted the factors that influence climate change adaptation action globally [19,20,21], there are few studies on people’s attitudes toward sea-level rise adaptation strategies [13]. More importantly, there are few studies linking behavioral aspects to adaptation to sea-level rise, and no such studies have been conducted in Ghana. Several studies have adopted the Protection Motivation Theory (PMT) as the foundation of a socio-cognitive model to describe individual adaptation behavior in response to climate change [22,23,24,25]. Protection Motivation Theory explains the cognitive process people go through when assessing their own ability to avoid a particular risk. Drawing on the PMT, this study examines relocation intention in three coastal rural communities in Ghana, each affected by coastal erosion and flooding. The study aims to understand the relocation intention of rural coastal residents in anticipation of sea-level rise. The study provides insight into the behavioral aspects of implementing managed retreat as an adaptation response to reduce the impacts of sea-level rise. Additionally, the study will highlight the application of PMT in the context of climate change adaptation.
