Farmer Adoption of Climate-Smart Practices Is Driven by Farm Characteristics, Information Sources, and Practice Benefits and Challenges

Abstract

Agriculture plays an important role in mitigation and adaptation to climate change. Yet, advances in climate-smart agriculture require a better understanding of farmer adoption. This exploratory paper uncovered differences that distinguish High, Moderate, and Low adopters of climate-smart practices. Our study utilized 952 in-person surveys of California farmers with a focus on mitigation and adaptation practices, along with farm characteristics, information sources, and practice benefits and challenges. Specifically, farmers with larger parcels were more likely to be High adopters, and farmers with access to only one water source were more likely to be Low adopters. There was no significant difference found between Moderate and High adopters’ use of any information sources. The ranking of different information sources changed between groups. Furthermore, there was no significant difference in the rate of Moderate and High adopters’ consideration of practice benefits. All groups identified practice uncertainty as the greatest challenge, with a significant difference between Moderate and High adopters. Our results demonstrate where differences occur between farmer adopter groups and by extension provide insights into where to target outreach efforts to promote the adoption of climate-smart practices in California agriculture.

Keywords: mitigation; adaptation; barriers; farmer adoption; California

1. Introduction

Agriculture is a substantial contributor to global climate change, with crops and livestock contributing over 11% of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States [1], and faces significant challenges in maintaining production under changing climate conditions [2]. Although crop-based production agriculture is not among the top contributors of greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere, it holds great promise in mitigating the adverse effects of climate change through improved nitrogen (N) management and carbon (C) sequestration. Thus, future agricultural systems will have to not only combat climate change through mitigation practices but also increase C storage through adaptation practices while continuing to feed a growing population in the face of climate impacts on food production. The need for both climate mitigation and adaptation actions across the agricultural sector is increasingly clear [3]. A key component of the effective integration of climate-smart agriculture strategies will be understanding both the drivers of and barriers to on-farm implementation that farmers face.

Climate mitigation and adaptation strategies will require simultaneous efforts that reduce emissions from agriculture, increase C sequestration on agricultural lands, and maintain or improve yields of food production. Because N is a key limiting nutrient in most soils, the use of N fertilizers has become ubiquitous across high-productivity agricultural systems over the past half-century, fueling substantial increases in food production. However, only about half of the N fertilizers applied to soils actually translate to the harvested product, while the other half may be lost to the environment through leaching to groundwater, where it contaminates drinking water supplies, or off-gassing, which can produce nitrous oxide (N2O), a powerful greenhouse gas with ~300 times the global warming potential of CO2. Thus, transitioning to climate-smart agriculture should involve practices that improve nutrient use efficiency (NUE), in order to reduce the amount of N2O emitted by cropland soils, while supporting efficient crop yields under changing climate conditions. A suite of management practices for achieving these goals are available, including practices that help to limit the over-use of N fertilizers, such as N budgeting, where N applications are tailored to fit N needs, and split N fertilizer applications, where nutrients are supplied to more closely match plant uptake and crop demand [4]. Carbon sequestration practices that have proven benefits for soil health provide further opportunity to reverse agricultural emissions and should be a part of the portfolio of practices being considered by farmers. Practices that promote soil carbon sequestration include the application of organic matter amendments to agricultural soils, which stimulates plant production and carbon sequestration via photosynthesis [5], and cover cropping, which similarly sequesters carbon in plant biomass and root exudates to the soil [6].

The appropriate combination of these practices to achieve desired mitigation and adaptation goals will vary across agricultural contexts and conditions [7,8] and require different degrees of investment and behavior changes by farmers [9,10]. Some management practices are more accessible (i.e., familiar, require less investment or system change), while others remain novel and more challenging to implement (i.e., costly, information-intensive, require operational transformation). A substantial body of research on farmer adoption behavior suggests a number of factors that can contribute to increased conservation practice adoption, including: access to information sources, positive attitudes towards conservation, higher education, larger farm sizes with access to greater capital, the recognition of co-benefits of practices (i.e., conservation and production), available market opportunities, history of past practice adoption, and positive social norms, such as the regional uptake of practice adoption [11,12,13,14]. The importance of each of these factors can vary greatly depending on the agricultural context and the specific management practice being adopted. For example, specific to the adoption of climate-smart agriculture practices, research has suggested that perceived capacity and self-efficacy [15], past experience with the effects of climate change [16], and beliefs that climate change is occurring and is attributable to human activity [17] are critical factors influencing adoption.

A widely recognized and often-applied theoretical framework in agricultural behavior change and adoption research is the Theory on Diffusion of Innovations [18], which describes how a new innovation is taken up by a specific population, where individuals differ in their timeliness of adopting new innovations, yielding “early” and “late” or High and Low adopters. Recent research leveraging this framework has begun to explore which of the aforementioned behavioral drivers generally thought to increase conservation practice adoption are significant drivers at different stages of an innovation’s adoption [19,20,21]. Understanding the characteristics that differentiate early versus late or High versus Low adopters, particularly on novel practices or suites of management practices, remains an open research question that requires context-specific, place-based studies. Developing improved understandings of the social and behavioral characteristics of early and late and/or High and Low adopter groups can provide insights for tailoring outreach to different farmers and developing intervention programs that effectively increase rates of adoption.

This exploratory paper aims to better understand the characteristics that distinguish High, Moderate, and Low adopters of climate-smart agriculture practices, leveraging survey data from 952 farmers across three regional water quality coalitions and diverse cropping systems in the Central Valley of California as a case study. The data presented and analyzed in this paper come from a larger research project focused on understanding farmers’ adoption of diverse suites of conservation practices, which focused on farmers’ behavioral motivations, barriers to adoption, access to information sources, and attitudes and beliefs regarding agricultural impacts on the environment [9,10,19]. This paper uniquely focuses on respondents’ adoption of four climate-smart practices including the mitigation practices of N budgeting and split fertilizer application and the adaptation practices of cover cropping and the use of organic matter amendments. Expanding these practices to California farms is of particular interest for their great promise of climate benefits, thus requiring a focused understanding of the behavioral factors that are likely to drive their adoption. Our analysis focuses on the differences between adoption groups in terms of farm characteristics, what benefits farmers perceive with each practice, the challenges that hinder further practice adoption, and where farmers source information.
