What If Country Commitments for CO2 Removal Were Based on Responsibility for Historical Emissions?

Abstract

This study explored the consequences of allocating commitments to remove CO2 to countries according to their responsibility for human-made climate change based on historical (cumulative) CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use and industry. The ‘carbon debt’ to be restored through CO2 removal was calculated as the remaining carbon budget for warming by 2 °C minus emissions until 2100. The study included the remaining carbon budget from the recent literature and scenarios for greenhouse gas emissions. This experiment showed that industrialized countries would need to take on the biggest share of CO2 removal if the calculation of historical emissions starts with the industrial era. If accounting instead starts with the global negotiations on climate policy in 1990, however, developing countries would have to take on the largest commitment for CO2 removal. Given this scheme and with the aim of settling the carbon debt over two decades with equal annual efforts, the eight countries with the largest shares of historical emissions would have to take on annual CO2 removal efforts from 1 to 12 Gt CO2. These CO2 removal commitments would imply substantial efforts for many countries but nevertheless depend on the choice of a fairness principle and calculation method to render this operational.

Keywords: CO2 removal; fairness; historical emissions; carbon debt

1. Introduction

According to the IPCC, the world will require massive amounts of CO2 removal (CDR) to be able to meet the climate policy goal of the Paris Agreement, which is well below the 2 °C warming from pre-industrial times and pursuing 1.5 °C [1,2]. CO2 and other greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions must be significantly reduced to meet this goal; however, CDR is gaining terrain as an essential complementary climate policy measure. The more slowly global GHG emissions are reduced, the greater the need for CDR to meet the climate policy goal. Reducing GHG emissions is more challenging in some sectors; for example, methane emissions from agriculture and some industrial processes where the development and deployment of more climate-friendly technologies will take time and likely be expensive. Furthermore, in the future, we may enter an ‘overshoot’ situation, where a high atmospheric GHG concentration will decrease the probability of meeting the climate policy goal, or where the GHG concentration approaches a ‘tipping point’ for the climate system. In such cases, further emission reduction is insufficient to meet the climate policy goal and more CDR is necessary [1,2]. From a climate system perspective, CO2 removal will therefore not be equivalent to the reduction in CO2 emissions from fossil fuels and industrial processes.

The basic concept of CDR is to remove CO2 from the atmosphere and store the carbon permanently in another sink, foremost the biosphere (i.e., living or dead biomass), the bedrock (carbon capture and storage (CCS)), or the ocean. There are six main categories of CDR technologies: bioenergy with CCS, biochar, forestation, enhanced weathering (mineralization), direct air capture (DAC), and ocean fertilization [2]. Ocean alkalinity enhancement, habitat restoration (vegetation and ecosystems), and the use of CO2 to produce carbonated building materials can be added to this list.

There is a wide gap between what science indicates about the need for CDR and policy development as well as deployment. One reason for this is that biomass has been considered neutral in terms of CO2 emissions since the climate convention (UNFCCC) was adopted in 1992. Another reason is the focus on GHG emission reduction until the IPCC 1.5 °C report came out in 2018 [2]. As opposed to reducing CO2 emissions, undertaking CDR projects may be seen as a public service since there are rarely direct local benefits, and the projects may even have negative side-effects when scaled up, in addition to the fuzzy politics of a fair handling of the ‘carbon debt’ [3]. Given this background, there is currently no common framework and rules for accounting and approving CDR activities; in addition, formal markets and business incentives for CDR remain absent [4,5,6]. Such rules may be developed under the carbon markets of Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. CDR is not compatible with the EU’s emissions trading system (EU ETS); however, the EU is developing a CDR certificate scheme [7]. Therefore, the further regulation and facilitation of rules and markets by the government is called for. The Paris Agreement focuses on a temperature goal, and there is some uncertainty regarding the equilibrium temperature response to a specific GHG concentration in the atmosphere. Consequently, an interpretation of the climate policy goal in terms of atmospheric concentration instead of temperature would simplify the rules for and accounting of CDR efforts.

However, there has been increasing CDR activity in the voluntary market, whereby companies with ‘net-zero’ or ‘climate neutrality’ goals buy climate credits (CDR credits) to subtract from their GHG emissions, primarily based on forestation and renewable energy projects. Several companies have been established to serve this market by producing and selling CDR credits. Some proprietary standards for CDR projects have also been developed, such as the Verra Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) and Gold Standard (other standards include VOS, CCB, Green-e, and standards in the formal markets, such as the CDM (Clean Development Mechanism), which was included in the Kyoto Protocol, and EUA (allowances under the EU ETS)). The lack of a globally accepted common standard for CDR projects means that quality varies and may be low for some CDR credits, which causes difficulties when making comparisons across projects and credit standards. The activity in the informal market may, however, provide learning opportunities and act as a steppingstone for the integration of CDR into formal carbon markets.

In this study a ‘what if’ analysis (‘experiment’) was performed, where the remaining ‘carbon budget’ for GHG emissions was combined with the estimated CO2 removal over the next decades required to meet the Paris Agreement’s climate policy goal, and each country’s responsibility to undertake CO2 removal was allocated based on their share of past CO2 emissions. From more than three decades of climate policy negotiations, we know that reaching a global agreement on how much GHG mitigation should be carried out and what a fair allocation of the necessary efforts would be is a very complicated challenge. Views on the fairness and burden sharing of climate change mitigation efforts are significantly influenced by national interests, which are related to each country’s level of development, industrial structure, and resource situation [8]. Consequently, when exploring climate policies, there are numerous relevant factors that may receive a high score with respect to fairness and therefore influence the ability to earn broad support in global negotiations. Some examples of such factors are land use changes and related CO2 emissions, GHG emissions from transport and buildings, emissions of GHGs other than CO2, population growth, development level and other economic conditions, energy system, available technologies, and the expected impacts of climate change. However, this study presents a ‘what if’ experiment that focuses on restoring excessive past CO2 emissions by means of CDR efforts, where the burden sharing across countries is based on responsibility, defined as the share of past CO2 emissions. Thus, a broader analysis of fair and feasible climate policies is outside the scope of this study.
