Question of Liability for Emissions from Land Development in Relation to New York State Climate Change Plan

Abstract

The question of liability (responsibility) for loss and damage (L&D) associated with climate change often ignores the liability for L&D from greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions which are the source of climate change-related impacts. New York State (NYS) recognizes its responsibility regarding climate change as documented in the NYS Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act (CLCPA) (Senate Bill S6599), which put forward the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions from all anthropogenic sources 100% over 1990 levels by the year 2050, with an incremental target of at least a 40% reduction in climate pollution by the year 2030. The current NYS carbon footprint (CF) does not include soil-based GHG emissions from land developments, preventing the state from reaching its net-zero emission goals. The current study addresses this shortcoming by quantifying the “realized” social costs of CO2 (SC-CO2) emissions for NYS from all land developments (12,037.5 km2, midpoint 1.7 × 1011 of total soil carbon (TSC) losses with midpoint $28.5B (where B = billion = 109, USD)) in social costs of carbon dioxide emissions, SC-CO2) and “new” land developments (485.2 km2) in the period from 2001 to 2016, which caused a complete loss of midpoint 6.6 × 109 kg of TSC resulting in midpoint $1.1B SC-CO2. All NYS’s counties experienced land conversions, with most of the developments, TSC losses, and SC-CO2 occurred near the existing urban areas of New York City (NYC), Long Island, and Albany. Land conversion to developments creates additional liability by the loss of future GHG sequestration potential in developed areas. In addition, there is a substantial future liability in NYS from climate change impacts, such as the projected sea-level rises will impact 17 of NY’s 62 counties, which will cause high costs of adaptation. Incorporation of land use/land cover change (LULCC) analysis can help better quantify the CF and identify ways to reduce GHG emissions and the associated liabilities and compensations to help achieve some of the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Keywords: carbon; CO2; compensation; greenhouse gas; law; policy; sustainable development goals

1. Introduction

Land development results in land cover change that causes direct GHG emissions. Responsibility or liability for the impacts of these GHG emissions can fall to various parties, including the developer as well as the local, state, and federal governments, who permit and often even promote this conversion. Beyond the liability for the GHG emissions, land development can incur additional liability associated with reduced future sequestration potential (e.g., loss of the ability to further sequester C in the soil or through forestry or agriculture activity), as well the liability for climate impacts (Figure 1).

The Role of Soils in New York State’s Plan to Reduce Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions

On June 18, 2019, the NYS issued Senate Bill S6599, “New York State Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act” (CLCPA), which sets GHG emission reduction targets from all anthropogenic sources 100% over 1990 levels by the year 2050, with an incremental target of at least a 40% reduction in climate pollution by the year 2030 (Table 1) [2]. The principal sources of NYS’s 2019 gross GHG emissions were: transportation (29%), electricity (13%), industry (9%), buildings (32%), agriculture (6%), and waste (11%) [3]. This list does not include soil-based GHG emissions from land conversions.

New York State’s pedodiversity (soil diversity) is represented by seven soil orders, belonging to slightly weathered soils (Entisols, Inceptisols, Histosols), moderately weathered soils (Alfisols, Mollisols), and strongly weathered soils (Spodosols, Ultisols) with different soil ecosystem services and disservices (ES/ED) and climate change vulnerabilities (Table 2 and Figure 2). The NYS has picked Honeoye as the State Soil (soil order: Alfisols) because of its agricultural importance (e.g., corn, wheat, soybeans, oats, alfalfa, vegetables, grapes, apples, grass pasture, hay, etc.) [4].

Soils of NYS provide various ecosystem services (provisional, regulation/maintenance, and cultural) within the economic regions of the state (Table 2). Most of the economic regions are dominated by the soil order of Inceptisols (54% for the state), except for the Finger Lakes region, which is dominated by Alfisols (55.6%) (Table 3). As one of the leading producers of GHG emissions (more than all Central America and Mexico combined), NYS has been experiencing numerous climate change impacts: increasing ocean and atmospheric temperatures; increase in the occurrence of extreme weather events and their intensity; rising sea levels and loss of land (especially existing wetlands) because of retreating shores and land surface sinking; coastal storms and flooding [9,10]. These climate-change-related L&D result in significant non-economic (incalculable) and economic losses in NYS [11]. For example, historical property damage cost data (1960–2014, total damage: $25.56B in 2014 USD) shows the following damage causes: flooding ($7.11B, 27.8%), severe storms ($4.30B, 16.8%), winter storms ($3.15B, 12.3%), hurricanes Floyd and Irene ($240.43M, 0.9%), Hurricane Sandy ($10.75B, 42.1%) [11]. Overall, hurricanes accounted for 43% of the total damages impacting primarily NYC and Long Island ($11.32B in 2014 USD) [11].

The present study hypothesizes that liability is a responsibility for climate change from GHG emissions, which can be elucidated, quantified, and valued based on the social cost of emissions (e.g., the social cost of CO2 emissions, SC-CO2, etc.). Land conversion causes GHG emissions from land development as well as any future loss of soil C sequestration potential because of the consequences of land development (e.g., buildings, impervious areas, etc.). Liability for these emissions and the subsequent climate change L&D can be divided among various responsible parties, including the administrative entities that create regulations and permit development, the developers that cause the land conversion and GHG emissions, and the consumers who purchase the developed property. Partial liability from GHG emissions can be quantified and valued as SC-CO2 at a fixed rate of $46 per metric ton of CO2 [12], which can be potentially used to help assign liability for climate change impacts. The fixed cost of SC-CO2, in many cases, will not compensate for the actual market-based costs of L&D for which liability will need to be assigned. Additionally, there are non-economic liabilities (e.g., trauma, loss of culture, etc.), as well as reduced future sequestration potential of developed lands. Assigning this liability has added complexity because, while attributing GHG emissions is possible (and demonstrated in this research), linking specific climate L&D events to individual GHG emissions is an emerging science; however, feedback mechanisms are necessary to change behavior that results in GHG emissions. Assignment of liability may be necessary to create new legal frameworks to change behavior that leads to climate change as well as create funding mechanisms for L&D compensation. There are various techniques to attribute and estimate liability across different geographic extents, time periods, and entities, which we will discuss in this paper.
