A Relationship between Climate Finance and Climate Risk: Evidence from the South Asian Region

Abstract

South Asia is the most vulnerable region in the context of global warming, climate change, and climate risk. Climate finance is the most useful tool for combating climate challenges worldwide. The study explores the present picture of climate finance in South Asian (SA) countries. The study uses multilateral development bank (MDB), Green Climate Fund (GCF), and Germanwatch supplied data from 2011 to 2021. Under the theoretical lens of institutional capacity development, the study attempts to correlate climate finance and climate risk. The study indicates an increasing trend of MBDs’ and the GCF’s climate finance in many countries worldwide. The study finds that MDBs’ total global climate finance is USD 446,977 million, while the SA region has received USD 59,301 million since 2011. It also reports that MDBs provide 77% and 23% of the money to the mitigation and adaptation areas. Moreover, the study reports that, after COVID-19, MDBs substantially increased the amount of global climate financing, but this increase was not seen in the SA region. Our climate risk data indicate that most of the SA countries are highly long-term climate risky and lose, on average, 0.378% of GDP. The correlation matrix finds a negative and significant correlation between climate finance and long-term and yearly climate risk. The study identifies that the region’s climate financing flow of money is not rationally distributed based on the short-run and long-run climate risks. The study presumes that more climate finance would be the most effective mechanism to mitigate climate risk. Therefore, SA region leadership drastically requires a holistic framework to address the prevailing climate problems and to ensure regional coordination and cooperation toward climate finance and policies. The research findings have significant implications for climate policy and climate finance.

Keywords: climate finance; climate risk; South Asia; climate politics

1. Introduction

Climate change and climate risk are closely associated issues as they directly and indirectly affect global warming. Climate risk is a major challenge in developing countries because of limited resources, lack of capability, ineffective institutional atmosphere, and lack of regional and international cooperation [1,2,3,4]. Prior studies also reported that poorer (developing) countries are more negatively affected by climate risks than richer (developed) countries because of several reasons, such as (1) insufficient resource capabilities and management, (2) the adversely affected health and productivity that decrease national growth, and (3) financial limitations [1,5,6,7]. Global warming, climate risks, and environmental problems are challenging to developed economies and developing economies as they create economic inequality globally [1,8]. Climate risk is the impact of the developed countries’ higher emission of CO2 while developing countries are the ultimate sufferers. The same argument is valid in the climate finance mechanism where developed countries’ contribution is insufficient, as expected by developing countries. Climate injustice, climate politics, and economic inequality are in the same line of discrimination that is highly affected in developing and climate-vulnerable countries [9,10]. Globally, climate justice is a significant term because developing countries’ climate risk burden is due to the developed countries’ higher carbon emissions. Hence, climate finance is an essential and most effective mechanism to mitigate global climate risk and establish climate justice and economic equality. Another logical question has been raised as to why do low greenhouse gas (GHG) polluting countries face the highest burden of climate challenges? The International Energy Authority (IEA) states that China, the US, and India’s GHG emissions are responsible for 85% of the world’s total carbon emissions. It leads to an academic debate on the injustice of carbon emission and economic development [1,8]. For example, the global GHG emission of Bangladesh is less than 0.35% [11,12], while the country is the most vulnerable country due to climate risk driven by extreme weather (global climate risk index is prepared yearly and published by Germanwatch, a Germany-based international organization). It is estimated that the country will lose 2% and 9.4% of its gross domestic product (GDP) by 2050 and 2100 due to climate risks [11].

South Asia (SA) is the most vulnerable to climate change, and most of the countries in the region are highly affected in terms of environment, water, health, and many other public issues [13,14,15]. Most of the countries in the region are highly affected by climate risk. They face severe problems of air pollution, water pollution, public health, biodiversity, waste, and deforestation. SA region countries are the top climate-vulnerable countries in the long term and short term (most of the top ten countries are from the SA region, see Table 1). Moreover, the region’s CO2 contribution is much lower than other developing and developed countries, but the region’s countries are paying the most severe damages due to global warming [1,8]. Furthermore, major cities are the most environmentally polluted in terms of air, water, and public health [15]. According to the Economist Intelligence global survey 2021, Dhaka is the world’s least livable capital and the US air quality index (AQI) of 2022 reports that Dhaka is the worst city in the world [16,17]. According to the AQI, most of the worst (polluted) cities belonging to the SA region also indicate the environmental vulnerabilities of the region’s countries (the world’s ten most polluted cities include nine cities in the SA region). Furthermore, Bangladesh faced an extreme heatwave in April 2023 and Dhaka has broken the last fifty-eight years’ temperature records [18]. The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported that climate crises in the region will be the most challenging issues for the next two decades. According to the IPCC report, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka face rising sea levels and severe flooding while landlocked Afghanistan, Bhutan, and Nepal face higher temperatures and drought [19]. The report also mentions the small island country of the Maldives will be lost in the future. Moreover, the first-ever report of the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) on a children’s climate risk index reported that children in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan are extremely vulnerable because of high temperatures (heatwaves) and natural calamities (extreme flooding) [20]. UNICEF also mentioned this climate crisis will impact children’s health, education, and protection. These negative signals strongly pressure regulatory bodies and policymakers to do something for the betterment of these countries. Therefore, policymakers promulgate many policies and rules to inspire and motivate the financial sector to take more action on climate financing.
