Chapter 9 Buildings

Executive Summary

Global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from buildings were in 2019 at 12 GtCO2-eq, equivalent to 21% of global GHG emissions that year, out of which 57% were indirect emissions from offsite generation of electricity and heat, 24%  direct emissions produced onsite and 18% were embodied emissions from the use of cement and steel (high evidence, high agreement). More than 95% of emissions from buildings were CO2 emissions, CH4 and N2O represented 0.08%, and emissions from halocarbon contributed by 3% to global GHG emissions from buildings. If only CO2 emissions would be considered, the share of CO2 emissions from buildings out of global CO2 emissions increases to 31%. Global final energy demand from buildings reached 128.8 EJ in 2019, and global electricity demand was slightly above 43 EJ. The former accounted for 31% of global final energy demand and the latter for 18% of global electricity demand. Residential buildings consumed 70% of global final energy demand from buildings. Over the period 1990–2019, global CO2 emissions from buildings increased by 50%, global final energy demand grew by 38% and global final electricity demand increased by 161% (high evidence, high agreement) {9.3}.

Drivers of GHG emissions in the building sector were assessed using the SER (Sufficiency, Efficiency, Renewables) framework. Sufficiency measures tackle the causes of GHG emissions by avoiding the demand for energy and materials over the lifecycle of buildings and appliances. Sufficiency differs from efficiency in that the latter is about the continuous short-term marginal technological improvements, which allows doing less with more in relative terms without considering the planetary boundaries, while the former is about long-term actions driven by non-technological solutions (i.e., land-use management and planning), which consume less in absolute term and are determined by biophysical processes. Sufficiency addresses the issue of a fair consumption of space and resources. The remaining carbon budget, and its normative target for distributional equity, is the upper limit of sufficiency, while requirements for a decent living standard define the minimum level of sufficiency. The SER framework introduces a hierarchical layering which reduces the cost of constructing and using buildings without reducing the level of comfort of the occupant. Sufficiency interventions in buildings include the optimisation of the use of building, repurposing unused existing buildings, prioritising multi-family homes over single-family buildings, and adjusting the size of buildings to the evolving needs of households by downsizing dwellings. Sufficiency measures do not consume energy during the use phase of buildings.

In most regions, historical improvements in efficiency have been approximately matched by growth in floor area per capita. Implementing sufficiency measures that limit growth in floor area per capita, particularly in developed regions, reduces the dependence of climate mitigation on technological solutions (medium evidence, medium agreement). At a global level, up to 17% of the mitigation potential could be captured by 2050 through sufficiency interventions (medium evidence, medium agreement). Sufficiency is an opportunity to avoid locking buildings in carbonintensive solutions. Density, compacity, building typologies, bioclimatic design, multi-functionality of space, circular use of materials, use of the thermal mass of buildings (to store heat for the cold season and to protect occupants from high temperatures (i.e., heatwaves), when designing energy services, moving from ownership to usership of appliances and towards more shared space, are among the sufficiency measures already implemented in the leading municipalities. At the global level, the main drivers of emissions include (i) population growth, especially in developing countries, (ii) increase in floor area per capita, driven by the increase of the size of dwellings while the size of households kept decreasing, especially in developed countries, (iii) the inefficiency of the newly constructed buildings, especially in developing countries, and the low renovation rates and ambition level in developed countries when existing buildings are renovated, (iv) the increase in use, number and size of appliances and equipment, especially ICT and cooling, driven by the growing welfare (income), and (v) the continued reliance on fossil fuel-based electricity and heat slow decarbonisation of energy supply. These factors taken together are projected to continue driving GHG emissions in the building sector in the future (high evidence, high agreement) {9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6, and 9.9}.

Bottom-up studies show a mitigation potential up to 85% in Europe and North America and up to 45% in Australia, Japan and New Zealand, compared to the baselines by 2050, even though they sometimes decline (robust evidence, high agreement). In developing countries, bottom-up studies estimate the potential of up to 40–80% in 2050, as compared to their sharply growing baselines (medium evidence, high agreement). The aggregation of results from all these bottom-up studies translates into a global mitigation potential by 2050 of at least 8.2 GtCO2, which is equivalent to 61% of their baseline scenario. The largest mitigation potential (5.4 GtCO2) is available in developing countries while Developed Countries will be able to mitigate 2.7 GtCO2. These potentials represent the low estimates, and the real potential is likely to be higher. These estimated potentials would be higher if embodied emissions in buildings and those from halocarbons would be included (low evidence, high agreement) {9.3, 9.6}.

The development, since the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), of integrated approaches to construction and retrofit of buildings has led to the widespread adoption of zero energy/ carbon buildings in all climate zones. The complementarity and the interdependency of measures lead to cost reduction while optimising the mitigation potential grasped and avoiding the lock-in-effect. The growing consideration of integrated approach to construction of new buildings as well as to the renovation of existing buildings results in a lower relevance of the step-by-step approach to renovate buildings and to breaking down the potential into cost categories, as to deliver deep mitigation and cost savings technologies and approaches shall be applied together in an integrated and interdependent manner (medium evidence, high agreement). The potential associated with the sufficiency measures as well as the  exchange of appliances, equipment, and lights with efficient ones is at cost below USD0  tCO2 –1 (high evidence, high agreement). The construction of high-performance buildings will become by 2050 a business-as-usual technology with costs below USD20 tCO2 –1 in developed countries and below USD100 tCO2 –1 in developing countries (medium evidence, high agreement). For existing buildings, there have been many examples of deep retrofits where additional costs per  CO2 abated are not significantly higher than those of shallow retrofits. However, for the whole stock they tend to be in cost intervals of USD0–200 tCO2 –1 and >USD200 tCO2 –1 (medium evidence, medium agreement). Literature emphasizes the critical role of the decade between in 2020 and 2030 in accelerating the learning of know-how and skills to reduce the costs and remove feasibility constrains for achieving high efficiency buildings at scale and set the sector at the pathway to realise its full potential (high evidence, high agreement) {9.6, 9.9}.
