Chapter 7 Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Uses (AFOLU)

Executive Summary

The Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use1 (AFOLU) sector encompasses managed ecosystems and offers significant mitigation opportunities while delivering food, wood and other renewable resources as well as biodiversity conservation, provided the sector adapts to climate change. Land-based mitigation measures represent some of the most important options currently available. They can both deliver carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and substitute for fossil fuels, thereby enabling emissions reductions in other sectors. The rapid deployment of AFOLU measures is essential in all pathways staying within the limits of the remaining budget for a  1.5°C target (high confidence). Where carefully and appropriately implemented, AFOLU mitigation measures are uniquely positioned to deliver substantial co-benefits and help address many of the wider challenges associated with land management. If AFOLU measures are deployed badly then, when taken together with the increasing need to produce sufficient food, feed, fuel and wood, they may exacerbate trade-offs with the conservation of habitats, adaptation, biodiversity and other services. At the same time the capacity of the land to support these functions may be threatened by climate change itself (high confidence). {IPCC AR6 WGI, Figure SPM.7; IPCC AR6 WGII, 7.1, 7.6}

The AFOLU (managed land) sector, on average, accounted for 13–21% of global total anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the period 2010–2019 (medium confidence). At the same time managed and natural terrestrial ecosystems were a carbon sink, absorbing around one third of anthropogenic CO2 emissions (medium confidence). Estimated anthropogenic net CO2 emissions from AFOLU (based on book-keeping models) result in a net source of +5.9 ± 4.1 GtCO2 yr–1 between 2010 and 2019 with an unclear trend. Based on FAOSTAT or national GHG inventories, the net CO2 emissions from AFOLU were 0.0 to +0.8 GtCO2 yr–1 over the same period. There is a  discrepancy in the reported CO2 AFOLU emissions magnitude because alternative methodological approaches that incorporate different assumptions are used. If the managed and natural responses of all land to both anthropogenic environmental change and natural climate variability, estimated to be a gross sink of –12.5 ± 3.2 GtCO2 yr–1 for the period 2010–2019, are included with land use emissions, then land overall, constituted a net sink of –6.6 ± 5.2 GtCO2 yr–1 in terms of CO2 emissions (medium confidence). {7.2, 7.2.2.5, Table 7.1; IPCC AR6 WGI}

AFOLU CO2 emissions fluxes are mainly driven by land use change (CO2 LULUCF), and account for about half of total net AFOLU emissions. The rate of deforestation has generally declined, while global tree cover and global forest growing stock levels are likely increasing (medium confidence). There are substantial regional differences, with losses of carbon generally observed in tropical regions and gains in temperate and boreal regions. Agricultural methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions are estimated to average 157 ± 47.1 MtCH4 yr–1 and 6.6  ± 4.0 MtN2O yr–1 or 4.2 ± 1.3 and 1.8 ± 1.1 GtCO2-eq yr–1 (using IPCC AR6 GWP100 values for CH4 and N2O) respectively between 2010 and 2019. AFOLU CH4 emissions continue to increase (high confidence), the main source of which is enteric fermentation from ruminant animals (high confidence). Similarly, AFOLU N2O emissions are increasing, dominated by agriculture, notably from manure application, nitrogen deposition, and nitrogen fertiliser use (high confidence). In addition to being a source and sink for GHG emissions, land plays an important role in climate through albedo effects, evapotranspiration and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and their mix, although the combined role in total climate forcing is unclear and varies strongly with bioclimatic region and management type. {2.4.2.5, 7.2, 7.2.1, 7.2.3, 7.3}

The AFOLU sector offers significant near-term mitigation potential at relatively low cost but cannot compensate for delayed emission reductions in other sectors (high evidence, medium agreement). The AFOLU sector can provide 20–30% (interquartile range) of the global mitigation needed for a 1.5°C or 2°C pathway towards 2050 (robust evidence, medium agreement), though there are highly variable mitigation strategies for how AFOLU potential can be deployed for achieving climate targets. The estimated likely economic (<USD100 tCO2-eq–1) AFOLU sector mitigation potential is 8 to 14 GtCO2-eq yr–1 between 2020 and 2050, with the bottom end of this range representing the mean from integrated assessment models (IAMs) and the upper end representing the mean estimate from global sectoral studies. The economic potential is about half of the technical potential from AFOLU, and about 30–50% could be achieved under USD20 tCO2-eq–1. The implementation of robust measurement, reporting and verification processes is paramount to improving the transparency of net-carbon-stock changes per land unit to prevent misleading assumptions or claims on mitigation. {7.1, 7.4, 7.5}

Between 2020 and 2050, mitigation measures in forests and other natural ecosystems provide the largest share of the economic (up to USD100 tCO2-eq–1) AFOLU mitigation potential, followed by agriculture and demand-side measures (high confidence). In the global sectoral studies, the protection, improved management, and restoration of forests, peatlands, coastal wetlands, savannas and grasslands have the potential to reduce emissions and/ or sequester 7.3 mean (3.9–13.1 range) GtCO2-eq yr–1. Agriculture provides the second largest share of the mitigation potential, with 4.1 (1.7–6.7) GtCO2-eq yr–1 (up to USD100 tCO2-eq–1) from cropland and grassland soil carbon management, agroforestry, use of biochar, improved rice cultivation, and livestock and nutrient management. Demand-side measures including shifting to sustainable healthy diets, reducing food waste, and building with wood and biochemicals and bio-textiles have a mitigation potential of 2.2 (1.1–3.6) GtCO2-eq yr–1. Most mitigation options are available and ready to deploy. Emissions reductions can be unlocked relatively quickly, whereas CDR needs upfront investment. Sustainable intensification in agriculture, shifting diets, and reducing food waste could enhance efficiencies and reduce agricultural land needs, and are therefore critical for enabling supply-side measures such as reforestation, restoration, as well as decreasing CH4 and N2O emissions from agricultural production. In addition, emerging technologies (e.g.,  vaccines or inhibitors) have the potential to substantially increase CH4 mitigation potential beyond current estimates. AFOLU mitigation is not only relevant in countries with large land areas. Many smaller countries and regions, particularly with wetlands, have disproportionately high levels of AFOLU mitigation potential density. {7.4, 7.5}

The economic and political feasibility of implementing AFOLU mitigation measures is hampered by persistent barriers. Assisting countries to overcome barriers will help to achieve significant short-term mitigation (medium confidence). Finance forms a critical barrier to achieving these gains as currently mitigation efforts rely principally on government sources and funding mechanisms which do not provide sufficient resources to enable the economic potential to be realised. Differences in cultural values, governance, accountability and institutional capacity are also important barriers. Climate change could also emerge as a barrier to AFOLU mitigation, although the IPCC AR6 WGI contribution to AR6 indicated that an increase in the capacity of natural sinks may occur, despite changes in climate (medium confidence). The continued loss of biodiversity makes ecosystems less resilient to climate change extremes and this may further jeopardise the achievement of the AFOLU mitigation potentials indicated in this chapter (IPCC AR6 WGII and IPBES) (high confidence). {7.4, 7.6; IPCC AR6 WGI, Figure SPM.7}
