Chapter 4 Mitigation and Development Pathways in the Near to Mid-term

Executive Summary

This chapter focuses on accelerating mitigation and on shifting development pathways to increased sustainability, based on literature particularly at national scale. While previous WGIII assessments have discussed mitigation pathways, focus on development pathways is more recent. The timeframe is the near term (now up to 2030) to mid-term (2030 to 2050), complementing Chapter 3 on the long term (from 2050 onward).

An emissions gap persists, exacerbated by an implementation gap, despite mitigation efforts including those in near-universal nationally determined contributions (NDCs). The ‘emissions gap’ is understood as the difference between the emissions with NDCs in 2030, and mitigation pathways consistent with the temperature goals. In general, the term ‘implementation gap’ refers to the difference between goals on paper and how they are achieved in practice. In this report, the term refers to the gap between mitigation pledges contained in national determined contributions, and the expected outcome of existing policies. There is considerable literature on country-level mitigation pathways, including but not limited to NDCs. Country distribution of this literature is very unequal (robust evidence, high agreement). Current policies lead to median global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of 57 GtCO2-eq with a full range of 52–60 by 2030. NDCs with unconditional and conditional elements1  lead to 53 (50–57) and 50 (47–55) GtCO2-eq, respectively (medium evidence, medium agreement) (Table 4.3). This leaves estimated emissions gaps in 2030 between projected outcomes of unconditional elements of NDCs and emissions in scenarios that limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) with no or limited overshoot of 19–26 GtCO2-eq, and 10–16 GtCO2-eq for scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) with immediate action. When conditional elements of NDCs are included, these gaps narrow to 16–23 GtCO2-eq and 6–14 GtCO2-eq, respectively. {Cross-Chapter Box 4, Figure 1}

Studies evaluating up to 105 updated NDCs submitted by October 2021 indicate that emissions in conditional NDCs have been reduced by 4.5 (2.7–6.3) GtCO2-eq, but only closes the emission gaps by about one-third to 2°C and about 20% to 1.5°C compared to the original NDCs submitted in 2015/16 (medium evidence, medium agreement). The magnitude of these emission gaps calls into question whether current development pathways and efforts to accelerate mitigation are adequate to achieve the Paris mitigation objectives. In addition, an implementation gap exists between the projected emissions of ‘current policies’ and the projected emissions resulting from the implementation of the unconditional and conditional elements of NDCs, and is estimated to be around and 7 GtCO2-eq in 2030, respectively (medium evidence, medium agreement), with many countries requiring additional policies and associated climate action to meet their autonomously determined mitigation targets as specified under the first NDCs (limited evidence). There is, furthermore, a  potential difference between mitigation targets set in NDCs ex ante and what is achieved ex post. A  limited number of studies assess the implementation gaps of conditional NDCs in terms of finance, technology and 1 See Section 4.2.1 for description of ‘unconditional’ and ‘conditional’ elements of NDCs.  capacity building support. The disruptions triggered by the COVID-19 epidemic increase uncertainty over range of projections relative to pre-COVID-19 literature. As indicated by a  growing number of studies at the national and global level, how large near- to mid-term emissions implications of the COVID-19 pandemic are, to a  large degree depends on how stimulus or recovery packages are designed. {4.2, 4.2.2.5, Cross-Chapter Box 4}

Given the gaps, there is a  need to explore accelerated mitigation (relative to NDCs and current policies). There is increasing understanding of the technical content of accelerated mitigation pathways, differentiated by national circumstances, with considerable though uneven literature at country-level (medium evidence, high agreement). Transformative technological and institutional changes for the near term include demand reductions through efficiency and reduced activity, rapid decarbonisation of the electricity sector and low-carbon electrification of buildings, industry and transport (robust evidence, medium agreement). A  focus on energy use and supply is essential, but not sufficient on its own – the land sector and food systems deserve attention. The literature does not adequately include demand-side options and systems analysis, and captures the impact from non-CO2 GHGs with medium confidence. Countries and regions will have different starting points for transition pathways. Some factors include climate conditions resulting in different heating and cooling needs, endowments with different energy resources, patterns of spatial development, and political and economic conditions. {4.2.5}

Accelerated mitigation alone may run into obstacles. If such obstacles are rooted in underlying structural features of society, then transforming such structures helps remove obstacles, which amounts to shifting development pathways. Various actors have developed an increasing number of mitigation strategies up to 2050 (mid-term). A growing number of such strategies aim at net zero GHG or CO2 emissions, but it is not yet possible to draw global implications due to the limited size of sample (medium evidence, low agreement). Non-state actors are also engaging in a  wide range of mitigation initiatives. When adding up emission reduction potentials, subnational and non-state international cooperative initiatives could reduce up to about 20 GtCO2-eq in 2030 (limited evidence, medium agreement). Yet perceived or real conflicts between mitigation and other Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) can impede such action. If undertaken without precaution, accelerated mitigation is found to have significant implications for development objectives and macroeconomic costs at country level. For example, most countrylevel mitigation modelling studies in which GDP is an endogenous variable report negative impacts of mitigation on GDP in 2030 and 2050, relative to the reference. In all reviewed studies, however, GDP continues to grow even with mitigation (robust evidence, high agreement). The literature finds that employment effect of mitigation policies tends to be limited on aggregate, but can be significant at sectoral level (limited evidence, medium agreement). Detailed design of mitigation policies is critical for distributional impacts and avoiding lock-in (robust evidence, high agreement), though further research is needed in that direction. {4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.6}
