Highlights from #COP26: EJN's Climate Change Media Partnership 2021

Our world, my friends, stands at a fork in the road.
One no less significant than when the United Nations was formed in 1945, but then the majority of our countries here did not exist.
We exist now.
The difference is, we want to exist a hundred years from now.
Two degrees is a death sentence for the people of Antigua and Barbuda, for the people of the Maldives, for the people of Dominica and Fiji, for the people of Kenya and Mozambique, and yes, for the people of Samoa and Barbados.
And we’ve come here today to say: Try harder.
Try harder, because our people, the climate army, the world, the planet, needs our actions now.
Climate change is the issue of our lifetime, and it’s important therefore that we have people who can not only expose the cause and impacts of climate change, but also explain how we can tackle it.
That’s why it’s vital that we have independent media worldwide to report on the issue of climate change and why it’s especially important that we have people from marginalized communities who are most impacted, giving voice to those marginalized communities.
My name is Maria Monica Monsalve, I’m a journalist from El Espectador, Colombia.
My name is Sibi Arasu, I’m an independent journalist from Bangalore, India.
My name is Ochi, I am a journalist from Indonesia.
My name is Baktygul, from Kyrgyzstan, I am a journalist for Azattyk Media.
I am Gaea Cabico, I am a journalist based in the Philippines.
My name is Shamsuddin Illius, I am from Bangladesh.
I’m Aïda Delpuech, a French and Tunisian journalist working for the independent media in Tunis, Inkyfada.
My name is Isaac, Isaac Anyaogu. I write for Business Day, it’s a newspaper in Lagos, Nigeria.
I’m Jessica Maes, I’m from Folha d. Paulo Brazil.
Rishika Pardikar, I’m a freelance reporter from Bangalore.
My name is Dan Kaburu, I’m a TV journalist from Kenya.
I’m Adriana Freitas, I’m from Brazil.
My name is Albert Oppong-Ansah, I’m a journalist with the Ghana News Agency.
My name is Anastasiia Zagoruichyk, I’m from Ukraine.
I’m Disha Shetty, I‘m a science journalist from India.
Mukesh Pokhrel, from Nepal.
My name is Fredrick Mugira, I’m the founder of Water Journalists Africa.
I’m Pia Ranada, I’m a journalist from Rappler, a news website based in The Philippines.
My name is Elfredah Kevin-Alerechi, I’m a journalist, I work for People’s Gazette in Nigeria.
My name is Yunanto, I’m from Indonesia, I work for Kompas.com.
Hi I’m Nat, I’m a writer with The Edge Malaysia.
Hello, my name is Muhammad Daud Khan and I’m from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.
COP is very important to the whole world, and even more crucially to the entire developing world.
There is nobody who’s now free of the impacts of climate change in any part of the world.
That’s why any attempt to talk and discuss and come up with a strategy on how to combat climate change, becomes crucial for all of us.
Politicians tend to move faster when they’re under public pressure, but how do the public form their opinions?
Where do they get their information from?
You know, we, obviously in the media, we like to think that responsible media plays a big part in raising climate awareness, in communicating complicated economics and science and the social impacts of climate, but is it true?
And if it is, how do we ensure that journalists themselves are equipped to deal with these complexities?
One of the main issues is women back home.
They are being neglected, they are not considered, they are left out of decision-making.
So we want commitments from governments, where they are going to put women into the negotiating process, during the decision-making process so that they become part of it.
Because you’ll find that the most vulnerable people to climate change, you’ll find that they are women.
At COP26, you know, there’s a lot of sticky issues here.
The real issue is not in the four corners of this venue, it is in our communities, in our countries so I think we need to push more on for example, on finance, mitigation, adaptation issues and of course highlight the human face of climate change.
I see a big gap, in not only journalism but also in the policy arena, that information is the key for us to cooperate, to understand, to build the trust and the confidence about tackling climate action, climate change and act together.
That’s the reason I come back to journalism.
What I’ve observed over the last few years, is there’s a lot more interest in climate stories.
The last few years we’re getting a lot more requests from journalists themselves: They want more training, they want to know more about climate change, they want to know where to get data, and I’m also seeing that journalists are asking their editors, their bosses to set up, to provide the resources they need to do more climate reporting, to assign them as environment beat reporters.
And I see this shift.
Being part of CCMP was a game-changing moment as part of my career, it was a really big deal for me.
I mean, I got the chance to be in this big, massive event, which was really overwhelming on the first few days.
After actually being there, I started new programs, new projects, I engaged with new stakeholders and other reporters from around the globe.
It was a really big moment in my career.
I’m really so happy I got into this fellowship, I think this way of covering the COP is the only way to cover a COP.
You’re constantly exposed and interacting with journalists from other countries and with people who have been watching these conferences for years, even decades, and you get much richer information.
I found that the video reports I’ve done, in-depth stories I’ve done, are much better in quality than otherwise might have been if I had just gone here by myself.
