Development, Climate Change & Capitalism

Between the mid 2000s and 2010s, we actually see 10 years of what we would call a golden age for labor activism in China.
So that was the 10 years where we actually see fast economic growth, we see a lot of labor struggles, we see rising real wages actually, and we see also fast capital accumulation.
So this actually shows that that 10 year really marked the period with very successful labor activism.
So the labor activism actually has some very positive impact on the real wage growth, but then all of a sudden it changed in 2016, right?
We see the labor repression and all that.
So I was trying to explore why, why is this inconsistent?
So my name's Ying Chen, and I'm assistant professor of economics at the New School.
I am a political economist, and my work mainly explores the contradictions of capitalism and how it manifests itself in the form of different kind of crises.
And in various crises in various areas, actually, but including and probably primarily now on the ecological crisis.
I also study development, and I see this unequal development process between the Global North and Global South as an innate feature of the overall capitalist development process in the world.
Most recently, I've been working on intervening the debate of global climate change from the Global South's perspective.
Most studies on climate change, and particularly China's role in it, usually starts with a positivist description, like what China has done and has not done yet, and what China is doing and is not doing.
And then ends with a normative prescription, like what China is supposed to do.
So for me, this kind of analysis lacks some understanding, some historical, political, and social understanding of how China makes the choice, why China makes some of the choices that it is making today.
What has driven China into the position today that in a way shapes its decision-making process.
So my intervention was really to use an historical and a political analytical perspective to see what has happened before, historically, and what is China's current economic system.
And therefore, what are some of the constraints that China has at this moment to pursue more progressive policies for the climate change crisis.
And therefore, also, at the same time, I try to look at how can some of the limits, that China is experiencing right now, can really be lifted given its internal economic condition as well as its external positions in the world.
There is one study that I recently worked on that shows, for example, that, although China, we can find that, when it invests in renewable energy sectors, it can actually generate twice as many jobs as the same level of spending if it were invested in the fossil fuel sector.
So that's actually very good news, right, for people who are serious about growing economy transitions.
The thing is that if you look closely at the data, you actually find that more than half of these jobs, particularly in the solar and wind energy sectors, are actually in the informal sector, which means those jobs are gonna be low wage and with little social welfare protection.
So that's actually not good news for the labor.
So that is actually a very important thing to look at that I feel is currently missing from the mainstream debate on, say, Green New Deal, or even the global Green New Deal, which usually would see the Global South country as passive recipients.
So the focus, the priority, is always on the Global North countries about what should be done there, and then talk about, okay, we can facilitate some kind of technological or financial transfer to the Global South country, which is already a very progressive proposal, if you think about it, right.
It's much better than the proposal that completely ignores the Global South countries.
But if you think about it, the Global South countries are still treated as passive recipients.
So whatever is going on within the block, within the Global South block, was not really carefully studied.
Problem that I just mentioned about, say, informality in China, right, is actually a very common problem for a lot of the Global South countries as well.
So this problem, if it's not addressed, then even with a lot of the technological or financial transfer to those countries, we will still see informality, right?
We will still see labor exploitation.
We will still see job precariousness, right?
So all these problems should also be at the center of the debate, I would say, rather than just as an outcome of whatever is initiated in the Global South.
I think this part, the Global South perspective, was really a key thing in my work.
And it has also informed some of my other discussions, things like some of the concepts that we often use in the climate change debate such as climate finance, climate debt.
For example, in the recent paper, my coauthor and I were arguing that concepts climate finance is very ahistorical and apolitical, and it focuses really just on the technical part of it.
While climate debt is a much more progressive concept because it actually integrates historical dimension of the story.
But then it also has its own limits, because how can you really calculate, how can you really quantify the debt, right?
How can you calculate human lives?
So it can get really tricky in the process.
So what we would propose is that if we really want to start with a Global South perspective, then we need to actually be very serious about the concept of global carbon budget.
There are a lot of discussions, actually, a lot of scientists were able to make a very good estimation on the global carbon budget, basically how much carbon that we still have left to consume if we want to maintain a 1.5 celsius degree scenario, right?
So it's actually a very straightforward concept.
I mean, if we think about it.
I mean, we have, right now, mostly commonly measured as 400 gigatons of CO2, right?
So we have also a projection of the human population.
So just very straightforwardly we can divide it and calculate how much is left for each person to consume.
My approach to development, again, I would say focuses a lot on the economic history of China as well as the economic system it is operating under.
So for example, there are a lot of people who would say, "Okay, China has had economic miracle, right?
It has had some economic success."
But at the same time, people would also say, "Well, there are a lot of inequality issues.
There are ecological destruction.
There are labor exploitation."
So how can we avoid those problems while having all these economic successes?
