The Biggest Climate Bill of Your Life - But What does it DO!?

Good Morning John, Today, Joe Biden is probably going to sign the largest single piece of climate change legislation any country on our planet has ever enacted.
But everything I have read, AND I HAVE READ A LOT, is frustratingly thin on details.
And, as I began to do the research myself on that…I discovered why.
I have been going over non-partisan analysis, congressional budget office reports, talking to the people who wrote those reports, talking to the Administrator of the EPA, even, in some cases, reading THE ACTUAL TEXT OF THE SEVEN HUNDRED PAGE BILL and what I have found has been a surprise…but also…a bit of a delight.
So let’s start at the beginning. (music “This is the beginning, the beginning…”)
Around 4 billion years ago, something started to be alive on earth and, ever since then, that life has had a profound effect on the planet.
Photosynthesizers used sunlight to break up Carbon Dioxide, build their bodies out of the carbon and release the oxygen.
That oxygen made all kinds of interesting weird things happen, including, at one point, killing almost everything.
So, no, life creating atmospheric change that has a profound negative impact on life, not actually new.
Over time, life kept shoving energy into carbon-containing molecules and then, after the life died, those molecules would break down and the energy would be re-released.
but sometimes the molecules of the dead thing would stay trapped and they wouldn’t break down and they would get stuck in the earth where they’d heat up and get squished and become coal, or oil, or natural gas.
All of that energy emitted by the sun, grabbed by life, and then stored by the earth, waiting there to power your car Or your refrigerator or your microsoft zune.
That energy is what has powered so much of our modern lives.
but as we have released that energy to do things with, we have also released the original molecules That it was stored inside of.
Those complicated carbon molecules Get broken down and carbon dioxide gets released.
It is a molecule that is opaque to a lot of infrared radiation.
A gas that makes our atmosphere less clear to heat.
And so heat that would otherwise escape no longer is.
There is more energy in the atmosphere, and it’s changing weather patterns, increasing droughts and fires and storms and heat waves.
But, unfortunately, we also really need all that energy to prevent people from dying in heat waves.
To make the food people eat, to move it around, to power the plane that takes me to visit my brother.
We can’t just turn the power plants off, people would start dying really quickly, and they wouldn’t stop for a really, really long time.
It’s messy and it’s complex and, like those first cyanobacteria people started to wonder if we weren't gonna just ruin it for ourselves.
But we are smarter than them and we are more capable of passing broad based industrial policy with a focus on clean energy than they are.
Barely… Just barely.
And that brings us up to now.
(Music: “I’m so excited, And I just can't hide it…” )
In 2005, a couple-a years before this YouTube channel began, the US hit peak carbon emissions of 7 billion tons per year.
At the time, that problem looked pretty insurmountable.
This is Jesse Jenkins one of the world’s leading experts on modeling decarbonization efforts on those dark years.
Jesse Jenkins: Umm.. you know, At the time if could get a wind farm that cost less than $100 a megawatt hour– which is like triple the, you know normal electricity rate that was a great deal.
And solar was ten times the cost of normal you know, normal power from a gas line or something.
But over the last decade, Due to solar policies in the US But also abroad, in, you know, China and Germany and Japan and elsewhere – We’ve taken these, what used to be called Expensive energy technologies That at the time people were worried We couldn’t get, you know – 5 or 10 or 15 percent of our electricity from Without blowing up the grid.
And now, they’re cheap trillion dollar Mainstream technologies that are Scaling rapidly, and are powering In the case of some parts of the country, The majority of the electricity on Certain days.
Hank: I’m in what seems to be a weird situation of being more optimistic now than I was 20 years ago because, in that time, I have seen a LOT of change.
Since this YouTube channel began we have dropped from 7 billion tons to 5 billion tons emitted per year in the US.
In the next 15 years, according to Jesse’s models Which are admittedly trying to predict the future We will probably get down to – 3.5 billion tons, 50% below our peak.
This week I was able to talk to Michael Regan, the head of the EPA And he also talked about this optimism.
Administrator Regan: Even when I talked to past EPA Administrators, The role technology plays in the solutions that we’re seeking, the quickness of innovation And the evolution of business models, matching with technology and science and data.
We can move much faster than we’ve ever We’ve ever moved before.
Hank: We are aiming for net zero emissions in America by 2050.
And this is the first time in my life that I have felt like that might be possible.
We have never undergone a shift in energy use that is anything like this.
Maybe the original electrification of the country – but we’re gonna have to make this shift a lot faster than we made that shift.
However complex you think it is, It is more complex than that.
It’s the case even for experts.
We only get to see our own little corner of what’s going on. This is a big problem that no one person understands all of.
But in this video, you’re going to go from knowing more than 80 or 90% of people about this stuff to knowing more than 99% of people.
And it’s only going to take you like 15 minutes.
So let’s do this.
(Audio clip: Voice 1: “What’s this?
Voice 2: “It’s an art project”
Voice 1: “Ok, I like it. Picasso”)
This bill basically has three big goals, And I don’t see them being talked about.
So, here’s the framework, With which to understand this.
One, we are trying to decrease the amount of carbon dioxide and other green house gasses being emitted into the atmosphere.
Two, we are trying to make the impacts of climate change, and pollution and also this energy shift, less impactful on people, or ideally, a good thing for people so that they like it.
Particularly we would like to decrease the impacts on the most disadvantaged people.
And third– And this is important to understand anything that’s going on here.
This is a bill that is trying to make the United States of America into an industrial center of the clean technology revolution.
Now there are some other smaller things that are in the bill that don’t fit into any of these categories. We’ll talk about them in the future, but those are the three big things.
