Friendly Guide to Climate Change - and what you can do to help #everytoncounts

OK so you've heard about climate change, and that it's a big deal.
But what is it really about?
And what can you actually do about it?
This video is a simple pragmatic summary of climate change.
We’ll cut through the noise and confusion and focus on the basic facts so you can figure out how to help.
OK?
So here's the situation.
The climate is kinda broken.
and we're in trouble because, well...
we're stuck on this one planet so our lives depend on it.
The GOOD news is that scientists have figured out the cause of the problem.
Us!
We humans broke it.
Yup!
But wait, wait..
How is that GOOD news?
Well, because it proves that we humans are powerful enough to actually impact the earth's climate.
which means we can FIX it.
Well, partly at least.
But before we get to solutions let's examine the problem a bit.
Here's our planet.
For thousands of years our average surface temperature has been mostly stable.
But now, just the past few decades, it has shot up.
By the way, this graph and everything else in the video has references.
Check the description below for links.
On a geological timescale that’s CRAZY fast!
We’ve never been at this level in the history of mankind and it keeps climbing.
We call this Global Warming because, well, that’s exactly what it is!
But wait.
A few degrees warmer, who cares?
It's a global average.
You might not even notice the difference locally.
Well actually, it has NASTY consequences.
When oceans get hotter, they expand so sea levels rise.
The heat also melts ice and glaciers sitting on land in places like Greenland and Antarctica which raises sea levels even further.
This rapid change destabilizes the climate.
We get flooding, extreme rainfall, extreme storms.
A lot of destruction.
Others places get extreme drought which kills crops and causes starvation.
We get heatwaves, wildfires, water shortage.
Basically, Bad Stuff happening all over the place.
Sure, we’ve always had storms and droughts and stuff from time to time.
But global warming makes them more frequent and more extreme.
All this climate-related destruction forces more and more millions of people to flee their homes, permanently.
And where do they go?
Even the places that are lucky enough not to be hit by extreme weather,  they need to deal with the growing stream of climate refugees showing up at their doorstep.
More people fleeing, fewer places to go.
That’s a recipe for instability and war!
Which in turn generates even more refugees compounding the problem.
It’s like we’re passengers on a leaking boat.
No matter where the hole is it’s still everyone’s problem!
As this drama unfolds, how do we react?
Some react with denial, some with panic, or shame, or blame.
But none of that helps solve the problem, so let’s skip that.
What does help, is doing something!
At the very least, it FEELS better than just worrying.
And congrats, you’re already doing something -- educating yourself by watching this video!
Now, the first step towards solving any problem is to understand it’s cause, so let’s talk about that.
Here’s our atmosphere, otherwise known as The Sky.
You’ve probably heard of the greenhouse effect.
Sunlight continuously hits our planet and reflects back out.
But greenhouse gases, like Carbon Dioxide and Methane capture some of that energy and keep it in, like a blanket.
That’s a good thing actually because otherwise the entire earth would be a frozen ball of ice and you would be a popsicle.
These gases have been pretty consistent for thousands of years, giving us a stable climate and enabling convenient things like, well, human civilization.
But during the past 50 years or so, carbon dioxide concentration has suddenly increased by 40%.
In 800,000 years it’s never been above this line and now suddenly it jumps to here and keeps rising!
Hmmmm!
Rising CO2 levels, rising temperature!
Coincidence?
No!
Turns out, this is the main cause of global warming.
So why is carbon dioxide increasing?
All living things are made of carbon.
Carbon is neither created nor destroyed, it just cycles around our biosphere as plants and animals live, breath, and die.
So what’s with all the EXTRA carbon?
where the heck is that coming from?
It all started a century and a half ago when we discovered a really neat party trick -- dig up coal and oil and gas and use it to fuel cars and produce electricity!
Wow!
These are known as “Fossil Fuels” because, well, they come from fossils buried carbon from organisms that died millions of years ago.
When we dig it up and burn it, we get LOTS of energy all at once.
Great!
But a side effect is that we also get carbon dioxide gas.
Note an important distinction here.
Non-fossil fuel, like burning a tree does NOT add carbon dioxide to our system as long as a new tree grows to replace it.
That carbon was already in our biosphere, it is renewable.
However, fossil fuels DO add carbon dioxide to our system because we dig it up and don’t dig it back down again.
And so every year we end up adding about 50 billion tons of greenhouse gases to our atmosphere and about 70% of that is carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels, mostly coal and oil.
And it keeps going up because of more people using more energy.
Hah! We found the biggest leak!
Now we just need to plug the hole.
The SECOND biggest cause of global warming is... actually we’ll get to that later.
Unfortunately climate change is happening faster than even the most pessimistic climate scientists expected.
Why? Because of so-called "positive feedback" which, by the way, isn’t nearly as positive as it sounds.
The biggest feedback loop is water vapour.
Hotter oceans cause more evaporation.
And water vapor is actually also a greenhouse gas so that causes further global warming.
Second feedback loop: Reduced ice cover.
Ice reflects sunlight.
When that ice cover melts away, more surface is exposed more heat is sucked in and global warming increases.
Finally, permafrost.
Large parts of Siberia, Greenland, Canada, and Alaska are covered in permafrost.
Turns out, this frozen soil contains lots of greenhouse gas.
When it thaws the buried gases are released causing even more global warming.
So climate change is accelerating because of three vicious cycles!
It all works together like some kind of evil scheme from a B-movie villain!
These feedback loops are almost impossible to stop so we really need to tackle the root cause.
Since burning fossil fuels is the primary cause of global warming, we need to.... STOP burning fossil fuels!
(thank you, thank you...)
