Why TV Comedies Get Climate Change So Wrong

This video was made in collaboration with the National Center for Science Education.
“Mr Plow” from the Simpsons’ 4th season is easily one of the best episodes of the long running sitcom.
For the uninitiated, this 1992 episode involves Homer starting a successful snow plow business that is ultimately spoiled, first by friendly rivalry then by an unseasonably warm winter day.
It also includes one of the earliest mentions of the greenhouse effect in scripted media; and is one the first, but hardly the last, to undercut the seriousness of the phenomenon.

Chapter 1: who's watching?
It might not seem like much, but if you are watching this video, then you must care - at least a little- about climate change.
It probably puts you among the 59% of people in the US who see climate change as a major threat.
The time for collective climate action is upon us, which means we must try to reach the 41% of people who don’t seek out information about climate change.
And those people watch TV.
On any given day, 80% of Americans will watch - or stream- TV, making it one of the largest platforms to communicate points of view.
From product placement to “very special episodes”, scripted media can be powerful in raising awareness and changing minds.
When it comes to general environmental issues, television, particularly children’s media, has devoted countless hours to covering pollution, endangered species and the importance of recycling.
Collectively, these efforts have contributed to highly successful community-based environmental programs all across the country.
However, of all the environmental issues covered,climate change has gotten comparatively tiny amounts of screen time.
When it is discussed, we found that it is usually framed in a way that casts doubt on its existence, treats activists as scam artists, and discourages action.
For this video, graduate students studying science communication through the National Center for Science Education went through the past 30 years of television comedy to find and analyze how climate change is framed.
You can find out more about our methods in the description here, but a quick note: We only looked at scripted, narrative comedy that had a point-of-view about climate change.
That means no Daily Show segments or climate disaster movies- their impact has been well-studied by others.
However, we’ve still probably missed some examples, so feel free to leave a comment and help us expand our list.

Chapter 2: positive effects
Comedy has to take a point of view, and understanding what a writer thinks is funny about climate change can be suggestive of how they - and the audience they are writing for - think about the issue.
[Dharma and Greg clip].
This approach relies on the humor of violating the norm of “global warming is bad” by highlighting a positive side, almost always something to do with warm weather.
Of course, this approach only works when the vast majority of viewers see this violation as, well, benign.
In the 90s, when this framing was popular, climate change seemed distant enough to make this appear harmless.
That’s why comedies from the Simpsons to Frasier used this framing, often with the same set-up and punchline, over and over.
As we became more aware of the true impact of climate change, this framing gradually became less popular, dying out altogether in the 2010s.

Chapter 3: the obnoxious environmentalist
While television comedies have become much less glib about climate change, writers still struggled to frame climate change in a way that made people want to learn more.
Moving into the 2000s, a lot of humor centered on the perceived obnoxiousness of characters that cared about the environment.
The humor here came from the outlandish and extreme environmental views expressed by these characters, from not owning a car, to making their own clothes to the perennial favorite - drinking their own urine.
30 Rock, My Name is Earl, and Modern Family all had episodes where the main cast was subjected to mental and physical torture at the hands of these annoying characters.
While the exact scenarios differ, these occurrences have three broad similarities.
First, the environmentalist character is an “outsider” to the main cast, and often low status, suggesting that their perspective is less valid than the main characters’.
Second, the character receives a comeuppance by the end of the episode that suggests that they are either lying about their environmental passion or equally as imperfect as the main character.
Finally, the take-home message for the audience is often “we know that you - like the main character- are doing your best and that’s fine.”
While viewers may find this positive message reassuring, it ultimately frames taking even minimal action as extreme and negative.
Viewing episode after episode with this character archetype can lead to skepticism about motives and general disinterest in learning more.
Though thankfully this type of humor has become rarer, one only needs to watch an episode of “The Politician” on Netflix to see the Obnoxious Environmentalist onscreen today.

Chapter 4: climate denial
Fueling this framing even further, was climate change’s big screen debut in 2004’s An Inconvenient Truth.
While the film had an important impact in inspiring climate action, it also provoked a counter-narrative that took the obnoxious environmentalist character one step further into climate alarmism, often casting doubt on the veracity of climate science.
Though several comedies incorporated characters skeptical of climate change, there was no television show more prolific in promoting climate denial than South Park.
The 2006 episode “ManBearPig” parodied what the creators saw as alarmism on the part of Al Gore, as he scared the town into believing in the fictional, titular character.
At the end, Gore is congratulated for saving the day, when the text of the episode suggests that the monster - a stand-in for climate change- never existed.
Other episodes including “Goobacks” and “Two Days Before the Day After Tomorrow” showed high-status characters expressing denialist views on climate change that were framed as correct.
Though the creators of South Park, once climate skeptics themselves, have since come around to accepting the scientific evidence for climate change, reruns of these episodes are still airing on multiple networks worldwide, exposing millions of people to very dangerous rhetoric.
